---
title: "Introduction to Physics"
featured: true
weight: 2
layout: content
authornum: 1
prevcontenturl: ../../physics
nextcontenturl: ../1.2-metric-system-and-SI-prefixes
---


Have you ever wondered how a car can quickly overtake a bicycle, why a rainbow appears after a drizzle, how electricity is generated, or how air conditioners cool our room?

Humans, by nature, are inquisitive creatures. As a result, every speck and aspect of our existence tends to be questioned. But it is not just the questions that pique our curiosity; the solutions, after all, are far more intriguing, and that is what Physics is attempting to provide. 

Filipinos, for example, are superstitious people that give absurd explanations for even the most mundane events. 
> "Umuulan kahit tirik ang araw dahil may kinakasal na kalbo"
> or 
> "Nagkakasakit dahit na engkanto"

These statements are just a few of the things we hear from the elderly. However, because of advances in science and technology as well as extensive research, what was formerly thought to be magical and mysterious may now be rationally justified. All has been possible because of science and mathematics, because of physics.

Physics explains such occurrences by combining mathematics with scientific data and concepts. This is the beauty of physics: it provides solutions and explanations to poorly understood concepts. And, despite the large amount of data that has been verified, there is still a lot more unravel and understand. After all, Physics, despite it existing for some generations, is still young at age.

As we tackle this course, we will do everything we can to help you appreciate physics and how you may apply it to your everyday life from a scientific standpoint. 

But, before we can examine the foundations of physics, we must first grasp its fundamental notions. And it all starts with adequately quantifying dimensions.