---
title: "Atoms and Electric Charge"
authornum: 2
author: Engr. Nico O. Aspra, M.Eng., RMP, LPT  <br> Engr. Pee Jay N. Gealone
prevcontenturl: ../20.1-introduction-and-history-of-electricity
nextcontenturl: ../20.3-electrical-charges-in-a-body
---



# Atoms

To comprehend how objects can generate a positive or negative charge, it is necessary first to understand the particles that comprise these objects. Atoms are the basic building blocks of matter and consist of three (3) basic particles: **protons**, **neutrons**, and **electrons**. Of these three, protons and electrons carry a charge, while neutrons, on the other hand, is neutral, which means it has no net charge.

Protons and neutrons reside at the **nucleus**, which can be found at the very center of the atom, while electrons orbit the nucleus ($\fref{1}$).


{% include images.html 
    url= "phys2/phys2-20.2.1.png" 
    size= "230px"
    caption = "Figure 1: Visual representation of an atom"
%}



# Electric Charge

A charge is defined as an electrical property of the atomic particles that consists of matter. It is measured in coulombs (C), named after French Engineer and Physicist Charles-Augustin de Coulomb.


The symbol $e$ usually denotes the **elementary unit** of charge. It is defined in terms of the charge of either a proton or an electron. Since a **proton** has a *net positive charge*, we can denote it as $e$. While an **electron** carries *the same magnitude but has an opposite charge* as the proton, hence we can represent it as $-e$.

$$
\begin{align*}
	e &= \text{charge of a proton} \\
	-e &= \text{charge of an electron}
\end{align*}
$$



In most cases, an atom contains an equal number of protons and electrons, canceling out the charge. 
The number of protons or electrons in a **neutral atom** is referred to as the element's atomic number. 

However, when the number of protons and electrons in an atom are not equal, creating a charge, the atom is referred to as an **ion**. 

If there are more protons than electrons, it will result in a net positive charge, which will then be called a **cation**. 

And when there are more electrons than protons, which will result in a net negative charge, it would be called an **anion**.  

The imbalance of numbers of protons and electrons happens when an atom **gains or loses electrons**, and this phenomenon is called **ionization**.




## Unit of Charge

An **electron’s charge** ($e$) is quantified as being equal to $1.602 \x 10^{-19}$ coulombs $(\mathrm{C})$ and has a **negative charge**.  What this means is that every electron intrinsically contains $–1.602 \x 10^{-19} \un{C}$, and it requires $6.24 \x 10^{18} \un{electrons}$ to gain one (1) coulomb of charge.


Similarly, a single **proton** contains $1.602 \x 10^{-19} \un{C}$ in magnitude but **positive in charge**. Hence, one proton contains $+1.602 \x 10^{-19} \un{C}$. 

The presence of equal numbers of protons and electrons in an atom makes it neutrally charged (The algebraic sum of charges is zero).




<!-- Coulomb, denoted as C, is used as the unit of charge in the SI units to quantify the charge on a larger scale than the molecular level. This has a value of, -->

<!-- And if we want to know the number of Coulombs in an elementary charge, all we need to do is to get its reciprocal, -->



{% include tcolorbox.html
    details = "
        e &= 1.602 \times 10^{-19} \un{C/proton} \\
        e &= -1.602 \times 10^{-19} \un{C/electron}
    "
%}


<!-- $$
\begin{align*}
    e &= 1.602 \times 10^{-19} \un{C} \\
    \frac{e}{1.602 \times 10^{-19}} &= \frac{\cancel{1.602 \times 10^{-19}} \un{C}}{\cancel{1.602 \times 10^{-19}}} \\
    6.24\x10^{18} \un{e} &= 1\un{C}
\end{align*}
$$


{% include tcolorbox.html
    details = "
        1 \un{C} = 6.24\times 10^{18} \,e
    "
%} -->

The mass of an atom is concentrated at the nucleus since the mass of a proton and a neutron is relatively larger compared to the mass of an electron. The mass of each particles are:

$$
\begin{align*}
	\text{mass of electron} &= m_e = 9.109\times 10^{-31}\un{kg}\\
	\text{mass of proton} &= m_p = 1.673\times 10^{-27}\un{kg}\\
	\text{mass of neutron} &= m_n = 1.675\times 10^{-27}\un{kg}\\
\end{align*}
$$

