---
title: "Resistance"
authornum: 2
author: Engr. Nico O. Aspra, M.Eng., RMP, LPT  <br> Engr. Pee Jay N. Gealone
prevcontenturl: ../23.0-resistance-and-conductance
nextcontenturl: ../23.2-resistivity
---


**Resistance** is defined as the measure of the **opposition to current flow** in an electrical circuit. 

It is measured in ohms, symbolized by the Greek letter omega $(\ohm)$.
All materials resist current flow to some degree. They fall into one of two broad categories: conductors and insulators.

**Conductors** are materials that offer very *little resistance* where electrons can move quickly. Examples of conductors are silver, copper, gold, and aluminum. Electrical wires contain conductors, which are primarily used to transport electricity from one point to another.

**Insulators** are materials that present *high resistance and restrict the flow of electrons*. Examples would include rubber, paper, glass, wood, and plastic. The common application of insulators is to provide outer covering to conductors in a wire.

## Relationship of Resistance, Length and Area

To understand how we can solve the resistance of a given material through its physical properties, imagine water flowing through a tube; the wider the tube's cross-sectional area, the more freely the water can flow. Additionally, the longer the tube is, the longer the time required for the water to pass through it.

Similarly, with a wire, its resistance can be determined as a function of its length and area. The **resistance** varies proportionally with its **length** and inversely with its **area**. Consequently, the longer the wire, the higher the resistance. On the other hand, the larger the area of the material, the lesser its resistance.

Mathematically, we can express it as:

$$R \propto \frac{L}{A}$$

Hence, by multiplying a proportianality constant "$\rho$'' we will get,


{% include tcolorbox.html
    details = "
        R = \rho\,\frac{L}{A}
        \label{eq:resistance using resistivity length and area}
    "
%}
$$
\begin{align*}
	\text{Where:}\quad R &= \text{resistance},\, [\mathrm{\ohm}] & \\
    \rho &= \text{resistivity},\,[\mathrm{\ohm\cdot m}] \\
	L &= \text{length},\,[\mathrm{m}] \\
	A &= \text{area},\,[\mathrm{m^2}]
\end{align*}
$$

<!-- The equation above can also be expressed in terms of the volume. Since the volume of a wire is defined as $V = AL$, then, 

$$
\begin{align}
    R = \rho\,\frac{L}{A} 
      = \rho\,\frac{L^2}{V} 
      = \rho\,\frac{V}{A^2}
\end{align}
$$ -->



