---
title: "Introduction to Functions"
date: 2021-08-07
prevcontenturl: ../0.1-introduction-to-differential-calculus
nextcontenturl: ../1.2-function-notation
---

In every mathematical course, or any course in general especially the advanced ones, there is always some particular concept the we first need to cover before we can confidently start the course. In calculus, the basic notion that we first need to fully grasp are functions. Functions have been present from algebra to analytic geometry. Almost all basic mathematics have already incorporated functions even without knowing what functions really are. Hence, starting our lesson with functions and grasping its concept will not be that complicated. 

A function is a special relationship between an input and an output, where the value of the output depends on the value of the input, given that *for every input there can only be one output*. Imagine the function as a juicer, if you use it on an apple you cannot expect a different type of juice other than an apple juice (Figure 1). With this in mind, replacing the fruit will result to a different juice.


{% include images.html 
    url= "DC/DC-1.1.1.png" 
    caption= "Figure 1: Relating a function as a fruit juicer"
    size= "70%"
%}


Functions can be expressed in various ways, including **symbolic** representations, **equations**, **tabular** representations, **graphs**, and even **phrases**. Figure 1 is an example of a symbolic representation of a function, relating this to an **equation**, for example $y = 2x + 1$. The variable $x$ is our apple (input), $y$ is the apple juice (output) and $2x+1$ is the juicer (function). The function tells us what to do to our input in order to end up with the resulting output. As a result, we get a value for $y$ for every value we replace $x$ with. 


---
$\example{1}$ 
Determine $y=2x+1$ if $x=5$.

$\solution$ \
Replace $x$ with 5 to the equation,

$$
\begin{align*}
	y &= 2x+1 \\
	   &= 2(5)+1 \\
	   &= 10+1 \\
	   &= 11	\tagans
\end{align*}
$$

Hence, if the input is 5 then the output of the function is 11

---


**Phrases** are another way of representing functions.  For instance, "there are two oranges for every apple," Another way to express this is to use a tabular representation of a function by assigning values to the input and solving for the values of the output (see table 1.1). 

|apple ($x$) | orange ($y$) |
|:---:|:---:|
| 1 | 2  |
| 2 | 4  |
| 3 | 6  |
| 4 | 8  |
| 5 | 10 |





Furthermore, we can still extend this and visualize the function by plotting it in a graph (Figure 2).

{% include images.html 
    url= "DC/DC-1.1.2.png" 
    caption= "Figure 2: Graphical representation of Table 1
"
    size= "50%"
%}


Nonetheless, we can represent it in an equation form by assigning variables to both the orange and the apple, say $x$ and $y$, respectively. 

$$
\begin{align*}
	\text{orange} &= 2(\text{apple}) \\
	y &= 2x
\end{align*}
$$



## Dependent and Independent Variables
Variables are symbols or letters used to represent an unknown value. The dependent variable on a function represents a quantity that depends on the value given to the independent variable. The symbol "$x$" is usually used to describe the independent variable (input) and "$y$" for the dependent variable (output). 

Determining the dependent and the independent variable of an equation is crucial since choosing the other way around may result in an equation that does not represent a function. Furthermore, this is highly useful, especially in applications such as Optimization and some Physics notions. For instance, in kinematics, an equation is given that describes the position "$s$" of an object at a given time "$t$". Since the position $s$ varies with respect to time $t$, not the other way around, then $t$ must be the independent variable and $s$ the dependent variable. Moreover, it is good to note that if time is one of the variables, it is most likely to be the independent variable since time is consistent.

In graphing a function, the independent variable is placed at the horizontal axis and the dependent variable on the vertical axis.



{% include images.html 
    url= "DC/DC-1.1.3.png" 
    caption= "Figure 3: Placement of the dependent and the independent variable in a graph"
    size= "50%"
%}




## Determining if an Equation Represents a Function or Not
We may use the definition of a function to determine whether or not an equation represents a function. Due to the fact that each input can only have one output, having two solutions to the same equation proves that the equation does not represent a function. 

In our future lectures, determining if an equation represents a function will be crucial since it will be one of the indicators of how a graph will behave. 



---
$\example{2}$
Determine if the following equations represent a function: \
a. $y=2x^2+1$           
b. $y=\sqrt{x+3}$          
c. $y^2=3x-5$           


$\solution$ \
$\For{a}$ \
For an equation to be considered a function, there must only be one output for every input. Say if we replace $x$ with 1

$$
\begin{align*}
	y &= 2x^2+1 \\
	&= 2(1)^2+1 \\
	&= 3
\end{align*}
$$

The output is 3. And even if we replace $x$ with any value, there is only one possible output, therefore $y=2x^2+1$ is a $\tcAal{function}$.


$\For{b}$ \
All positive real numbers has two square roots, so if we replace $x$ with 6,

$$
\begin{align*}
	y &= \sqrt{x+3} \\
	&= \sqrt{(6)+3} \\
	&= \sqrt{9} \\
	&= \pm 3
\end{align*}
$$

The outputs are $3$ and $-3$. So since a single input has two possible outputs, $y=\sqrt{x+3}$ is $\tcAal{not a function}$


$\For{c}$ \
This case is almost the same as the second example, if we isolate $y$ from one side,

$$
\begin{align*}
	y^2 &= 3x-5 \\
	y &= \sqrt{3x-5}
\end{align*}
$$

Hence, $y^2=3x-5$ is also $\tcAal{not a function}$











